Gentzen is usually regarded as having produced four different versions of his consistency proof

Voevodsky’s objection was that Gentzen’s only justification for Theorem 2 was that it was self-evident—a
suspicious claim, according to Voevodsky, since Go¨del’s
theorem tells us that Theorem 2 cannot be proved using
‘‘usual induction techniques.’’ If we take this objection at
face value, then it is at best misleadingly phrased. Gentzen
does not say that Theorem 2 (or rather, the variant of it that
he uses in his proof) is self-evident; he gives an inductive
argument along the lines we have given. As we have seen,
by normal mathematical standards, there is nothing particularly ‘‘unusual’’ about the inductive argument.8 The
only way I have been able to make sense of Voevodsky’s
argument is by interpreting it as assuming that a consistency proof for a system can be convincing only if it can be
carried out in a system strictly weaker than the system itself.
If we accept this assumption, then we can indeed view
Go¨del’s theorem as a deal-breaker, but then Voevodsky’s
objection becomes a blanket rejection of all consistency
proofs and has nothing to do with any specific concerns
about PA or Gentzen’s proof. As we argued earlier, Go¨del’s
theorem, which Voevodsky cites in support of his objection, does not entail such blanket skepticism.
It could be that Voevodsky’s real concern was that even
though the statement of Theorem 2 is finitary, it does not
feel like an axiom, and the only ways to justify it seem to be
infinitary. Gentzen tried to argue that the induction needed
for his proof was just more complicated than, and not
different in character from, the finitary induction argument
that every weakly decreasing sequence of natural numbers
must eventually stabilize. But since ‘‘finitary’’ is not precisely defined, the point can be legitimately debated. Note,
though, that rejecting the proof of Theorem 1 comes with a
cost: it potentially means that many routine mathematical
arguments by induction are suspect—not just those
involving arbitrarily complex first-order properties.
Alternatively, Voevodsky’s real concern may have been
that the proof of Theorem 2 is insufficiently constructive,
since the stabilization point is not, in general, computable.
Again, this could be a tenable objection, but it comes at a

p6